Today's hypertrophy day. Not by design
though.
Little bit of a mishap, you know, and
these things happen and it's my fault.
It's my fault. But uh check that out.
Right. So,
you know, I was warming up with sumo
deadlift.
I know in the comments you're going to
say, "So, you right for pulling sumo?"
Um, yeah, maybe it does. Whatever.
Whatever. Um, but it uh tore my callus.
I hit 270. You know, it's pretty
comfortable, but I can just feel my hand
ripping. So, I didn't go heavier. I
thought I wanted to go heavier than that
today just to feel it. Um, and I know
that I can, but um, when you rip your
hand like that,
you just can't go on. I've seen it so
many times where people rip their hand
in competition. They're doing like a
warm up, whatever it is, they rip their
hand and then they'll go in and try and
go heavier and it just doesn't hold. So,
I'll tell you something. I um before the
session, it was bad preparation from my
part. Normally, I get an emery board, so
like a nail file, and just gently file
it down. Your hands should be smooth,
soft. So,
that's a comment that a lot of people
say about the best deadlifterss in the
world when they shake their hands. You
know, in strongman, they use straps. So,
that doesn't really count. The ones that
have to grip onto the barbell, they take
care of their hands because if you tear
a callus um or if you allow your hands
to develop calluses, that's exactly what
rips off. Like, it's a hard bump under
your hand and that just it's the exact
spot that the knurling rips straight
off. And if that happens, you just won't
be able to grip the barbell. Like you're
holding on to it, but the skin
underneath just peels off. Anyway, so
that's what happened to me. A little bit
annoying, but
maybe serves me right for doing sumo.
No, I'm not going to stop sumo. Uh I
just stopped doing sumo for today. Uh
and what I did instead is I thought I'm
going to just do quads. You know, if in
doubt, just just squat more. And I
haven't really had a good squat session
in a while. Um I've been going too heavy
too frequently. And I think I need to
come back to some hypertrophy work. My
body responds very well to doing some
volume work. My body responds well to
alternating between strength phases and
hypertrophy phases. So that's a strategy
called monthly undulating periodization
that I learned from Charles Polloquin.
And yeah, I don't know if he invented it
or whatever, but that's something that
he definitely popularized with his
methodology. So you do a phase of high
reps so that you can do things like
build work capacity and build muscle.
And then you do a phase of low reps so
that you can build strength and then you
just alternate or undulate between
accumulation phase which is volume and
hypertrophy to intensification which is
strength. And those two modalities
complement each other. So what happens
is that's one of the negatives for doing
like linear periodization where you're
spending so much time on one physical
quality and neglecting the rest. So, if
all you're doing is heavy work for a
long time, you lose muscle mass. And if
all you're doing is light work with high
reps, you're going to lose strength. So,
what happens here is you're alternating
month by month or phase by phase,
however long your messo cycles are
between strength and hypertrophy. So,
you're not spending enough time away
from those physical qualities to
actually drain them. So, anyway, I know
that I'm kind of responding pretty well
to that. So, hypertrophy session it is
time to switch on because I think 180 is
good for hypertrophy for me. Um, time to
switch on. I'd like to do a hypertrophy
rep range here. What's a good rep range
for me? Anyone at home? Eight. Did you
say? Ah, why'd you say that?
Now I got to do eight. I don't know if I
can. I've never done eight on this
before. I've done eight on high bar.
I've done eight on 180. I've even bench
press 180 kg for eight. But on a
stiletto squat, it's a lot harder. So,
time to get my game face on.
Hopefully, I do it.
You with me?
Hope you're with me.
All right, time to switch on.
>> Put some music on.
>> You reckon?
>> Is a long
>> I'm going to put some music on. So
you all right?
What are we going to put on? You know
what I like? A bit of chili peppers.
Do a bit of chili peppers.
Good one. Okay,
I'll tell you what the sucky thing is
about this. I got to do another set.
Let's talk about rest times for
hypertrophy versus rest times for
strength. It's kind of accepted in
strength and hypertrophy communities
that for hypertrophy you use less rest
and for strength you use more rest. Why
would we do that? For strength
performance matters. So therefore we
need a fuller recovery so that we can
perform multiple bouts or multiple sets
of high quality work or or heavy weights
without missing reps. But when it comes
to hypertrophy, a lot of people are kind
of chasing that training to failure
feeling. Therefore, when you're reducing
your rest, it's easier to train to fail
because you haven't had a complete
recovery. So that could be one reason
why some people think that less rest is
better for hypertrophy because it allows
us to work to failure. So why do you
want to work to failure? The main
mechanism of hypertrophy is mechanical
tension. Now mechanical tension occurs
when we train to failure or get close to
failure. So therefore, you know, it
seems like a good idea to work to
failure or have less rest so we can get
to failure a bit easier. So that's one
reason why some people like to have less
rest, which I don't agree with. I think
performance does matter for hypertrophy.
The next reason is the idea that less
rest induces a hormonal effect. So I
used to teach this actually, but it's
wrong. So don't go by what I'm saying
right now. This is what's not right and
it's been disproven that you get a
hormonal response. Reducing your rest
periods increases things like your
growth factors and your testosterone and
therefore you build more muscle. So
that's what people are trying to chase
with less rest periods, but that's been
debunked. Now I don't want to say it
doesn't have a hormonal effect. It may,
but not enough that it actually causes
anything meaningful. And how are we
going to measure it anyway? We just
can't. So don't bother with any of that
stuff. So when it comes to hypertrophy,
in my opinion, performance does matter.
One of the reasons why it makes sense to
have less rest is so we can do more sets
in the same amount of time, which is
very good for hypertrophy, doing more
volume. However, for me, performance
always matters, even when it comes to
hypertrophy. So, I like to have,
especially for the big complex
movements, I'm giving myself the same
amount of rest, which is 8 minutes
between my top sets, you know, besides
180 kilos for a stiletto squat for eight
reps. It's pretty fatiguing. I want to
have a fuller recovery. Anyway, time to
get my game face on because I got one
more minute rest and then we're on
another set of eight.
[Music]
[Applause]
Man,
that was hard.
You know what's weird?
The first rep was really hard and I'm
like, "Oh no, I got seven more of those
to go." Anyway, we got there. Two by
eight.
What are two next?
Three sets or
Oh my god.
Three sets of eight
would be
hectic. Three sets of eight would be
hectic
on Friday.
>> I know I'm squatting twice this week
and the idea is for Friday to be my
heavy session.
So what do we do? You know what? That
was good quality. That were
You know what I want to do? You know
what I want to do? Must
>> No, bro. I mean I do. I do want to do
RDL's,
but here's another thing. I'm on a roll.
I'm going to do three sets.
Could this be a mistake?
It could be. I better not miss any reps
because if I miss reps, I'll be very
embarrassed.
>> I can't do less than that.
See, that's a different approach with
programming. I like to do the reps that
I prescribe. So if I say three sets of
eight, I want to do three sets of eight.
And I don't want to miss reps. So
another approach is
having a rep range discrepancy. So on a
hypertrophy day, a lot of people love to
do things like having a range. So it's
like three sets of six to eight reps or
eight to 10 or whatever it might be. And
you have a usually a two rep range
discrepancy. So why two rep range? So
that if I go here 180, if I go like 8 8
7 6,
it's good. But then if I go 885,
that's too much. That's too fatiguing.
That's where those last sets, I'm too
fatigued to have high quality sets and
it now becomes junk volume. Whereas if
you keep it within that rep range or the
two rep discrepancy, that's when it's
like, yeah, it's just a really great
effective session. So I quite like that.
if I was to use ranges, but I don't use
ranges. I don't want to use ranges. I
want to hit the exact number that I
prescribe.
So that to do that, what you need to do
is not go to fail on any of those sets.
So the first set there were reps in
reserve, right? Second set, that's how I
look at that. If there's a rep in
reserve, I know I can do another set. If
I give myself enough recovery, that is
if I just gave myself, you know, three
to four minutes rest, there's no way I
would be able to back up two sets in a
row with that rep range, I wouldn't be
able to because, you know, although it's
a hypertrophy style of training, it's
still heavy. Performance matters and I'm
still going to factor in I want to get
all reps all sets and I want this to
carry over to the strength of my squat.
Okay? So it's not just about hypertrophy
for bodybuilding. It's about
hypertrophy for a strength athlete has
to have some relevance to your main goal
which is I want to have a good squat. I
want to have good squat, bench press,
deadlift as a power lifter. So therefore
the hypertrophy needs to have relevance
to achieving that. So a lot of people
think things like hypertrophy phase. A
lot of powerlifterss like to take time
off their powerlifting training and do a
hypertrophy phase and they call it a
bodybuilding phase, right? Well, it
might be a bodybuilding phase, but you
have to understand hypertrophy for
bodybuilding looks very different to
hypertrophy work for a strength athlete.
The work still needs to have relevance
to the end goal. Hypertrophy for a
bodybuilder doesn't need a squat. You
don't need to load your spine at all.
It's bit of an advantage not to load
your spine. So doing things like
machines, leg presses, hack squats,
great exercises. Nothing wrong with
those, but they don't have as much
carryover
to your squat as my choice of
hypertrophy exercise, which is a
stiletto squat.
So I'm going to do one more set. And I'm
not going to do the RDL's.
Yeah. Yeah. I'm going to do So, you
know, like I warmed up with the
deadlifts, had a bit of a a boo boo.
Nothing major, but I just know I can't
grab onto the bar. like my skin. I need
to use a nail file to to make that
smooth. I don't know if I finished those
sentences. The best deadlifterss have
very very smooth hands. They protect
their skin. They look after the skin and
they file off the calluses so it doesn't
rip. And you think that you'd need rough
hard hands to be a, you know, to have
good uh strong skin for a deadlift, but
actually the opposite is true. You want
to have nice supple hands.
[Music]
>> Come on.
Ah!
>> Whoa!
That's um it's weird because I can see
the speed that it's coming up. It's like
it looks okay, but I feel like my legs
are dead. It's jelly legs.
Man,
that was
I knew I had it. I knew I had it.
That's, you know, another strategy that
I have when I'm doing rep work of a
squat is I take an extra second at the
top
before I go down again. That's called
breathing reps
instead of doing constant tension reps.
But you know what? That
is
definitely something that I need. is
something that I neglect is the rep
work. So, it's three sets on 180. That's
a decent weight. It's decent volume on
quadriceps.
That
is how you squat if you want to build
quadriceps, which I don't do a huge
amount of. I do it like it's an
accessory, but now I need to do a phase
of that as my main work,
not just one set, you know, volume. But
anyway,
I'm going to do hamstring curls next.
That's it. Just hamstring curls.
And that's going to be a nice
hypertrophy session.
Like I said, it was a change of plans.
Again, I was meant to go for a decent
deadlift,
but the hands didn't want it. You know,
of all things, I'm very grateful that
that's the injury that I have. You know,
I'll cut that off next week. I'll use
straps instead to give it a little bit
more time to rest. And then the week
after I'll be get back to grabbing it
with my hands.
So if if that is the worst of my
problems, it's a very good day. You
know, imagine tearing a muscle or
injuring yourself, you know, that's a
terrible day. So yeah, torm callus is
just a little bit of a boo boo. Protect
your hands. That's why you need to
protect your hands cuz if that happens
in competition, it's weird. It's like
it's slippery. 275 doesn't slip out of
my hands, but when the skin, the
calluses I just not cared for because
I've been doing light work for such a
long time that I just didn't care. And
then it's like, oh, they're really hard.
Those those calluses are hard and
actually painful.
And every when I was putting chalk on
it, every set it was pressing against it
a little bit more. And then I saw a
little tear underneath it. And then on
the 275, I could just feel it just
slipping out of my hands. And it's not
slipping out of my hand. Well, it is
slipping out of my hands, but it's the
skin. It's still gripped onto the skin,
but the skin's coming off the hand.
So, it's frustrating feeling. Lesson
learned. Anyway, I'm going to take these
sleeves off and then I'm going to do
some hamstring curls and then I'm going
to call it a day. And that's going to be
a good session. Good way to finish the
session instead of just walking away
with a torn callous.
See this? Here's my little hack. I get
toilet paper and wrap it around my knee.
If any of you have these knee sleeves
and they stick in, they dig into the
back of the skin of your knees. I wrap
toilet paper around and then just a
little bit of tape so that when I bend
cuz these are very firm. So that part
digs into the back of the knees
and it can hurt and it can make your
skin bleed and it makes squatting,
especially with that much volume. If I
did that without this tape, I'd be
bleeding. But anyway, good session. Good
session. Thanks for joining me.
>> One thing you never mentioned, Thor just
pulls 510.
>> Thor just pulled 510. Look at me. You
know why I didn't mention it was
strategically. Like, how dare I come in
for a sumo session the day after Thor
Bjönson deadlifts 510 kg. How dare I?
That was the deadlift gods
punishing me saying, "How dare you?"
Anyway, Thor Bjönson 510 and And what a
510 that was.
How much did he have in him? 520.
>> Yeah, I I think I think minimum for sure
he would have got 520. I think 525
is 1,200 lb. Either 525 or 540 uh 545.
Uh 525 kg
kg.
No, into pounds.
Nah, it's 545. So, he needs 545 to crack
the,200 lb. But either way, I think he
had I think he had 525 in him. 510 was
beautiful. Like you can't underestimate
it. It was smooth. There was zero hitch,
you know. You can't underestimate it and
say, "Bo, he had 11." He had 1,50
or sorry, 550 kg. You can't say that
because every, you know, 5 kg more, like
for sure five more. And I'd say for sure
even 10 more. But then when you go a
little bit more than that, you don't
know what happens. You know, people say,
"Oh, he didn't even hitch, so therefore
it was um he had more in him." Well, you
know, to a degree, but you get to a
point where hitching is actually an
inefficient technique.
Hitching,
in my opinion, means you're out of
position. And if you're able to, that's
what he did. He did it without a hitch.
That's because he aligned perfectly.
Man, that technique came together, did
it not? Anyway, congratulations, Sonen.
What's your plan with his training? Now,
>> my plans with his training is we're
going to Rogue Invitational. So, that's
at the start of November. Um, and the
deadlift in that is not the same as a
max deadlift. It is a max deadlift, but
it's a different implement.
Um, not a normal deadlift. Details, full
details, no one knows yet. So, um, but I
know it's not a normal deadlift.
>> Are you going to go with
>> Yeah, I'm going to go this time. I'm
going to go this time. I get too much
FOMO. It was Father's Day on the
weekend, so it was like, you know, I
want to go, but then, you know, I got
two daughters and
can't let him down for Father's Day. So,
damn it. Missed out on amazing
performance by Thor. 510 deadlift and he
went on to win the show. It's
>> crazy.
>> He won the whole show, you know. Um, so
what a freak of an athlete. Safe to say
Thor's back. Thor's back. you know, his
upper body strength isn't back to where
it was for sure, but it's coming back
now, I think, psychologically. So, you
know, he um tore his peck in a
powerlifting competition um you know,
probably close to two years ago now.
And that's been a very big psychological
hurdle for him cuz every time he goes to
do a press, of course, like if anyone's
ever injured themselves, you'll know
that it's not just the tissue repair
that's required, the mental repair is a
huge part of the process. So, every time
he holds a heavy weight in his hands,
he's hesitant. And you can't be that way
when you're going for big numbers. Uh so
that's improving majorly now. Like
literally just
for this last competition, his pressing
strength was just like, "Oh, feels like
it's clicking now. Feels like I don't
feel anything at all. No sensation on
the pegs." So that's a great sign. So
Rogue Invitational. Um still all of the
events are yet to be confirmed, but I'm
going to be going there. That's at the
start of November. And this week he's
going to take it easy. Uh he's going to
come back in and do a one upper and one
lower session on Friday on Thursday and
Friday. That's going to be light. And
then next week we start the new program
leading up to Rogue Invitational. I
might um have a chat with Thor for you
guys and record it for YouTube, talk
about his training and all of that
stuff. So that could be of interest to
you guys. Anyway, hamstring kill time
after I take these off. I need my
videographer to help me take them off.
So, hope you enjoyed that session. I'll
see you guys next